Uh well to be an intelligent agent you
need to be both embodied and embedded in
the world. What's become problematic is
what kind of embodiment
is plausible is possible and what kind
of world uh do you want?
So bodies are are becoming increasingly
augmented, machines becoming
increasingly autonomous.
Artificial intelligence is generated.
Artificial cognition contaminates human
comprehension. And that's a a good
thing. The digital is not only the realm
of the virtual though. It also
facilitates alternative anatomical
architectures.
To be in excess is to oscillate between
the biological, the machinic and the
virtual both in proximal and remote
spaces. So aliveness and a effect is not
only generated in the biological to be
in excess is to be an extended and
affective operational system.
uh between 73 and 75 I made three films
of the inside of my my body uh not for
any medical reason but as aesthetic
gestures uh probing the internal uh
spaces of the body. So for the first
time I felt my body not as a surface of
skin but rather as an internal
architecture of structures, spaces and
circulatory systems. And then 20 years
after that uh being invited to the fifth
Australian sculpture trial whose theme
was sight specific works instead of a
sculpture for a public space I decided
to design a sculpture for the internal
space of the stomach an artwork for an
organ of the body.
So inside the the stomach the sculpture
opens and closes, extends and retracts,
has a flashing light and a beeping
sound. So a simple machine choreography
uh inside uh an inflated organ of the
body.
So there's no longer any meaningful
distinction between internal and
external spaces of the body and
increasingly no distinction between the
living and the dead.
In fact, uh Frederick Nie reminds us
that the living are only a species of
the dead.
So what's happening? What's happening
here? The dead, the brain dead, the
partially living, the yet to be born,
the cryogenically preserved, the
prosthetically augmented, the
plastinated, synthetic life and
artificial life all now share a material
and proximal existence. The body
individually achieves planetary escape
velocity, but the human can no longer
achieve escape velocity from the
machinic and digital realm. It never was
a prosthetic body. It was always
augmented by artifacts, instruments, and
machines. So what it means to be human
is perhaps not to remain human at all.
A series of suspension performances
here, sitting counterbalanced by a ring
of rocks, gently swaying from side to
side, setting up random oscillations.
uh hoisted up and down a lift well
um suspended side on looking towards the
horizon. Uh the only people who saw this
performance was a group of fishermen on
an out another outcrop of rocks. They
were fishing before we arrived. They
kept fishing during the performance and
they were fishing when we left. Uh but
these suspensions are not meant uh for
any uh uh interpretation. And they're
not meant to generate any meaning as
such. They're just experiences in
visceral and and physical uh sensations.
Uh suspended uh 60 m above the Royal
Theater. After about 30 meters, all you
could hear was the whooing of the wind,
the worring of the crane motors, and the
creaking of the skin.
and uh over East 11th Street uh in in
New York got arrested for this one.
Um and a performance in um in uh uh
Brisbane, one of the few in Australia,
where the body is uh suspended
vertically
uh with the control box uh from a gantry
crane. It could propel itself forwards,
backwards, sideways within the the
space. No one really knew what was
happening. Everyone thought it was just
going to be an up and down job. Uh in
fact the performance uh went for about
uh 20 minutes and people followed. Um
there was a certain ambiance with a
crying child and a barking dog in the
audience. Um and I also discovered that
by stopping and starting suddenly I
could generate swinging an unexpected
bonus for the choreography.
Uh so this performance actually begins
when the body is hoisted off the ground
and the performance ends when the body
touches down.
um augmenting the body was a desire that
was generated by exploring these
physiological and psychological
parameters of the body. Uh the first one
was uh the third hand actuated uh by
electrodes on the abdominal and and and
leg muscles allowing independent
movement of the three hands.
sophisticated enough at the time to get
invitations from the Jet Propulsion Lab
in Pasadena and the Johnson Space Center
in Houston to demonstrate the hand to
the extra vehicular activity group. Um
just an aesthetic attachment for
performance.
But here writing one word each each hand
writing a separate letter at the same
time. Uh because of the spacing of the
three hands I was writing every third
letter. I had to keep remembering what I
was doing. And because it was on a sheet
of glass between the artist and the
audience, I had to learn to write it
back to front.
So the digital is not only the realm of
the virtual. Uh but it also generates
these alternative embodiment. And being
digital means the body inhabits this
flattened ontology of interacting
algorithms, machines, instruments,
organism, objects, and other ecologies
and networks. Of course, I'm alluding
here to uh uh actor network theory and
object-oriented ontology. So, in both of
these flattened ontologies, there's no
privileging of the human.
a performance with my third hand. Uh
lasers uh uh come to the eyes via optic
uh fiber cables. Uh the sounds that you
hear are amplified brain waves,
heartbeat, blood flow, uh muscle
signals, and the sound of the third
hand. Whoops, jumped over that one.
So this performance began when the body
was switched on and it ended when the
body was switched off. The extended arm
uh is an arm that extends my right arm
to primate proportions. And in this per
uh performance whilst my arm is extended
on the right side, my left arm is
performing involuntarily
via a muscle stimulation system. Uh and
it's a continuous 4hour performance.
Uh the performance was streamed um and
we also had um uh a a 3D model, a VRML
model at the time um uh which mimicked
the movements of the the hand mechanism.
So people uh online could watch not only
the video streaming of the performance
but the 3D model uh mimicking the the
hand mechanism.
I'm I'm showing this not not uh in
temporal order but more in a logical
order. I'm now going back in time. Um uh
this is a sixderee of freedom muscle
stimulation system. Uh the blue switches
indicate which parts of the body could
be pre-programmed
um through a touchscreen interface by
touching the model on the computer. Um
the model 3D model performs your
choreography and a second later in
Luxembourg where my body was my body
performed involuntarily. So people in
the Pompidoo Center in Paris, the media
lab in Helsinki, the doors of perception
conference in Amsterdam could access the
body and remotely choreograph its
movements.
So we now navigate from deep time to
physical nano scales to virtual
non-places. The body inhabits abstract
realms of the highly hypothetical and of
streaming subjectivity. So the body
becomes a kind of hyperhuman that
becomes less than the sum of its
hyperlinks but more than the sum of its
attachments and implants.
Um using the ping protocol pinging uh 30
global locations during the performance.
the reverberating pings uh to the host
computer measured in milliseconds mapped
to the body's muscles. So the body
becomes a kind of crude barometer of
internet activity.
Uh parasite uh we custom engineered a
search engine to scan the net, select
anatomical images from the web, project
them to my headup display. The the
complexity of these images are analyzed
and mapped to my body's uh muscles.
So the body here is a live mid uh video
mixer and switcher of the performance.
Um sensors on the head, arms and legs
allows the body to switch between
cameras um uh situated around it and
above it.
So the images that the body sees are
literally uh the images that move the
body.
A moatar was a a kind of inverse motion
capture system where an avatar could
access my upper body via a pneumatic
exoskeleton
and generate um or or project its own
agency. The the avatar was imbued with
genetic algorithms which allowed it to
to alter its behavior uh throughout the
the the performance. And so the upper
body is avatar actuated. The lower part
of the body can perform with its own
agency. So a split body experience, not
a split mind and body, but a split
physicality.
Um, also interested not only in
manipulators but also in uh locomotion.
I've been fascinated with comparative uh
ev evolution uh insects and animals and
we engineered a six-legged walking robot
um that supports the the artist's weight
and uh the upper body exoskeleton allows
the the artist to select the um uh leg
movements of the robot. So by making
different gestures, you can select
whether the robot walks with a ripple
gate forwards and backwards, a tripod
gate sideways. Uh the robot can squat,
it can stand, it can stomp on the spot.
And it's only about taking the robot for
a walk. Uh no pyrochnics.
uh just simply uh walking with the robot
experiencing uh the idea of of
navigating uh in a space with six legs.
Uh but it's also a sound machine.
The rain is
so Exoskeleton is was only a 3 m
diameter uh robot. Uh this walking
machine is five meters. So
so almost the diameter of the stage. Um
and it's a walking machine that simply
translates human bipedal gate into a
six-legged walking uh locomotion.
Um encoders on the leg joints enables
the the the the body to walk the robot.
So by lifting one leg up, three robot
legs lift and swing forward. So by
stepping up and down, uh the robot uh
walks. Um sensors in the chassis of the
machine uh detect the direction that the
artist is facing and the robot walks in
that direction. So all of these projects
are about alternative anatomical
architectures. They're not about
enhancing the human body, but rather
experimenting with augmenting it in a a
variety of different ways. The walking
head is an autonomous 2meter diameter
robot. Uh the intent here was to uh
engineer an actual virtual system where
the mechanical movements of the legs
modulate the facial behavior of the
human head displayed.
Um microbot is a a project that I keep
showing that has never been realized.
um we're having problems um scaling it
down small enough for this to function
effectively and robustly. But the idea
is to engineer a small robot robust
enough uh to climb up my tongue and into
my mouth. I just have to be careful not
to swallow. uh but it is a a kind of an
aesthetic gesture as to the increasing
internal surveillance of the human body
that will occur with micro
miniatururization and and nano scaling.
uh initially for monitoring medical
pathological conditions, changes in
temperature, blockages in circulatory
systems, uh uh detecting the first uh
pathological cancerous cells which then
might be easily targeted and eradicated.
But the most interesting possibility is
that you could redesign the human body
atoms up inside out. it would happen so
incrementally invisibly you would not
know that a metamorphosis is is
occurring until the symptoms surface uh
externally.
So, so in this age of body hacking, gene
mapping, uh prosthetic augmentation,
organ swapping, face transplants,
synthetic skin, what it means to be a
body, what it means to be human and what
generates aliveness and agency becomes
problematic. So in these spaces of
proliferating prosthetic bodies, partial
life and artificial life, uh the
biological body has become profoundly
obsolete.
Um a project done um with another
artist, Nina Cers, where both artists
had extracted using lipos suction 4.6
lers of our biioaterial.
Uh this was uh inserted into an
installation uh titled blender. Uh
blender is the inverse of the stomach
sculpture.
Instead of um a machine choreography
inside a soft organ of the body here a
machine installation becomes the host
for a liquid body composed of
biioaterial
from two artists bodies.
uh anthropomorphic in scale uh with
sensors in the in the chassis of the
installation. So whenever anyone
approached uh they would trigger the
blender blades to
to mix uh the biioaterial. The
biomaterial um is much smoother in
composition than it originally was.
Um,
with the partial head project, we
scanned the artist's face. We scanned a
homminid skull. We did a digital
transplant of the artist's face over the
homminid skull, producing a kind of
composite face, which was kind of
posthomminid,
not quite human. Um, and then using that
data, we 3D printed a scaffold
and seeded the scaffold with living
cells. So, we grew a layer of living
skin over this composite uh kind of
third face. Um, it only survived uh days
before it got contaminated in in the
gallery and we had to preserve it in in
the formaldahhide for the rest of the
month exhibition.
Uh the prosthetic head uh something that
uh Karen Marcelo worked on. Um the pro
the prosthetic head was an embodied
conversational agent just ahead uh
projected 5 mters high. So it had to
have a a physical presence through its
scale. Uh effectively you could
interrogate the head and it would
respond with spoken answers with
real-time lip syncing. uh facial
expressions. Um
I'm going to show a performance though
um with the prosthetic head where the
head uh uh generates sounds and even
singing um and I'm using a connect
sensor which is detecting my arm
gestures and uh my arm gestures map uh
different animations and sounds onto the
prosthetic head. I'm wear I'm wearing a
a head-up display so I can see what's
happening behind me. So you're sort of
uh constantly um you know oscillating
between uh the physical body gestures
you're making and the uh and the virtual
uh imagery that's happening behind you.
I
>> What's interesting is the glitching that
occurs between gestures. And that's what
I was playing with.
Although this performance occurred in
2011, uh the actual prosthetic head uh
was engineered and programmed uh around
2001.
Uh so quite a while back. Um a recent
iteration is the articulated head which
has the prosthetic head imaged on on on
a on a monitor attached to uh an
industrial robot arm. Uh which means you
could augment the virtual behavior of
the head uh with the the physical
sixderee of freedom movements of the
robot arm. Um, and uh, with this
physical installation, we could have
body tracking and also sound location,
so the head could uh, converse with
people that are are standing around it
and can turn and face them and so on. Um
when when we now of course can uh uh uh
get hyperreal skins through photo
gammetry uh through uh laser scanning um
and effectively now our our skins have
become our screens. Um we communicate
via screens. We caress uh the skins that
are our screens. and skins of screens
are now beginning to attain optical and
and haptic thickness. And it is this
thickening that will collapse the
psychological space between remotely
linked bodies. Um generating an intimacy
without proximity, an intimacy without
uh skin contact.
So, it's sort of a it's it's certainly
an age of circulating fractal and
phantom flesh. And by circulating uh uh
flesh, I mean we could uh extract an
organ from one body and insert it into a
living body. We can stitch the hands
from a cadiva to the arms of an an
amputee and animate those hands. Um, by
fractal flesh I mean bodies and bits of
bodies spatially separated but
electronically connected generating
recurring patterns of interactivity at
varying scales. It's just another way of
of saying it's the internet and also
phantom flesh. We're now h are coupled
to our phantoms online.
We're simultaneously still functioning
as physical bodies offline but as
virtual bodies online. And and when I
say phantoms, I mean not fantasmatic,
but rather as phantom limbs. Uh
increasingly now there'll be sensation
feedback. Um so to others over time to
others over time um bodies appear as
flickering on and off as a kind of
biological noise as a kind of glitch in
biological time.
Um the ear uh was initially uh imagined
as an extra ear on the side of my head.
uh after 10 years I couldn't get anyone
to assist surgically to do it on that
location. Uh but in 2006 we did get um
sorry I jumped. In 2006 we did get
funding uh to uh to perform the s the
the second this is the second surgery um
where we could insert a biioaterial
uh scaffold beneath the skin.
>> That'll be a nice stable construct for
our microphone.
The parocity of this scaffold uh
encourages your own cells to grow into
it to populate it. And as the cells are
populating the scaffold, they grow their
own blood supply. So the ear becomes a
living uh part of of your body. Um it's
really only a relief of an ear. We did
uh uh some other surgeries to try to
lift the helix, but because the ear is
positioned or um near muscle, it tends
to sink back into the arm.
>> Can you hear me now?
>> Good.
>> Just
the better it'll be.
>> Yeah.
>> Scissors, please. Got it.
>> Right here. Come around this arm here.
Make sure the audio system still works.
But speaking even through the dressings
and uh zero form gauze and plaster, you
can still see the bars moving on our
transmitter which shows that the
microphone is still picking up sound and
the ear is still functionally working.
Uh so the ear only lasted about a week
before it got seriously infected. Um,
but it's uh still on my on my arm. If
you can uh see it from from the
distance, you you are. Um, so it's it's
uh it's something that's uh now as I as
I mentioned in the living part of my
body, but the intention was never simply
to uh replicate the ear and relocate it
on my arm. This was never the the
original intention. The idea was to
electronically augment the ear to
internet enable it. So this ear is not
for me or was not intended for me. Uh
this ear was intended for uh people in
other places as a remote listening
device. Um there are biomedical and
technical uh micro miniatururization
problems uh insulation problems charging
the internal battery problems. Uh so
this has not been realized um with its
original intent. In fact um I have to
admit that uh I've made a career out of
being a failure. Uh none of what I uh
imagine turns out in actuality.
Uh some art projects are 4 m high uh 4 m
long a sculpture of the ear on my arm.
Uh a performance just simply lying on
the sculpture. Uh my body is covered in
white clay. a kind of counterpoint in
scale between uh an actual body with an
ear on its arm and and a much larger
fragment, a sculptural fragment. But
whilst lying on the sculpture, I thought
it might be interesting uh 25 years
after the last suspension to do one
more.
Make sure that everything's been
removed.
Go. Go.
Go go go go go go.
So I knew when the body was was was
being hoisted up that because the ca the
steel cable is braided
uh when it takes the weight of the body
the steel cable begins to untwist uh
spinning the body. So no one no one sort
of touched me. The body naturally begins
to spin in one direction uh then
gradually slows down, starts spinning in
the other direction. I thought I might
be spinning for 5 minutes. It went for
about 15 minutes.
Um and this performance began when the
body was hoisted off the sculpture and
the performance ended when the body was
lowered back down.
Um and uh this was uh the last
individual performance I did suspended
with my body. But having met Hov Fiel in
Copenhagen,
um
I didn't know about the body suspension
community at the time. He introduced me
to people um and we decided that it
would be interesting uh to do some group
suspensions using other other
volunteers. Uh Samar uh who's here is
one of these people suspended.
Uh this is titled shadow suspension. It
involved six bodies suspended uh
suspended from a hexagonal structure.
It's
coming.
I just shot the video.
Uh, in this performance, the bodies
attached to the end of industrial robot
arm. So we could precisely program uh
the uh the the the uh position
orientation of the body, the trajectory
of the body and the velocity of the
body. Uh in this one the sound is
important.
And when the body's performance ended,
we uh attached a sculpture of the
artist's ear and the same choreography
was performed. Uh what's interesting is
that the robot that choreographs the ear
is the same robot that carved the ear.
The robot effectively was a CNC machine
uh to to produce the sculpture.
So here the body becomes this extended
operational system of bodily metabolism,
machine musculature and computational
programming.
Uh the exoskeleton arm uh was engineered
for the rewide remixed performance in
2017 and for that performance for five
days uh six hours every day
continuously.
The body could only see with the eyes of
someone from London. Could only hear
with the ears from someone in New York.
But anyone anywhere at any time could
access my right arm and choreograph the
movements of the of the right arm. So I
didn't know what I was going to see. I
didn't know what I was going to hear and
I didn't know when I was going to be
thrown off balance when someone uh
lifted the arm. So the body effectively
was in in kind of three uh uh places at
once. uh one physically in Perth at the
Perth Institute of Contemporary Art and
two virtually in London and New York. A
kind of outsourcing of of agency and a
sharing of visual and acoustical senses
moving.
>> Oh yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We saw half the
sculpture. Heat. Heat.
Heat. Heat.
His
eyes are in London. His ears are coming
from me in New York. And he's in
Australia with his arm hooked up to this
robotic device controlled over the
internet for 5 days.
I've never
>> So, these are criminally brief edits,
but I'm trying to get through a a bunch
of stuff.
So extended into these non-places and
task envelopes of virtuality, the body
subjectively experiences itself as a
kind of extruded system rather than an
enclosed structure. The self becomes
situated beyond the skin and the body is
emptied. But this emptiness is not from
any lack but rather an emptiness through
excess. an emptiness through the excess
of its technological paraphernalia.
So the body has become this contemporary
chimera of meat, metal and code that
performs beyond the boundaries of its
skin and beyond the local space that it
inhabits.
Uh, reclining stickman was a 9 m long, 4
m high stick figure robot actuated by
pneumatic uh rubber muscles, nine
degrees of freedom and the rotating
continuously on its axis.
Uh there was online interaction as well
as uh local uh local control of the
robot and there was a performance uh for
five hours where uh on the robot I could
actuate the limbs with a pair of
pneumatic joysticks
uh improvising with any local or remote
interactivity by by visitors.
There was an aesthetic surveillance
system.
So you have to imagine the sounds are
being generated by the compressor, the
the compressed air, the solenoid clicks,
uh the muscles are inflating and
contracting, uh exhausting and
extending.
Uh when I imagined doing this, I imag
imagined it as a kind of contemporary
Pieta, you know, a large robot uh
clutching a small human. Uh but Nina
Cellers more astutely observed that here
the body is merely a human strap on for
the robot.
um with the stickman uh uh uh
exoskeleton, a minimal but full body
exoskeleton
um which algorithmically actuates the
body for a five-minute uh performance.
We also engineered a physical interface,
a mini stick man. So audience uh members
could uh bend the limbs of the mini
stick man uh press play and their
choreography would be performed uh in in
the uh via the exoskeleton.
um sonic resonance a performance in um
Tokyo uh last year um using two sensor
bracelets, a headset that allowed that
amplification also of heartbeat and
muscles. Uh the sounds that you hear are
sounds generated from those. Um there's
a camera attach attached to the robot
arm. Uh, I have an interactive sensor
system which makes the artist the video
switcher and video mixer. And by lifting
my left arm, I can take control of the
robot camera and produce rotating or
panning and tilting.
I've got a camera on my wrist bracelet
as well, allowing closeups of the of the
artist.
Um, The ambidextrous arm project
recently engineered in Paris um has four
modes of control. An autonomous
algorithmic generative mode, a proximal
teley operation mode, a bio signal sync
mode and an online interactive mode. Uh
the first performance in Paris will be
early next year. And it also has an eye
inarm camera at its wrist again enabling
uh close-ups of the performing artist.
Uh this was just the the recent test.
There's been no performance yet.
Uh the sounds that you heard were
amplified uh sounds of the tendon and
motor signals. Um so just to finish off
or close to finishing um in 2011
the first uh twin turbine artificial
heart was implanted into the chest of a
terminally ill patient.
um he survived long enough to fully test
this new robust uh and uh very reliable
and much smaller artificial heart. The
interesting thing is that it uh
circulates the blood continuously
without pulsing. So in the near future
you might rest your head on your loved
ones chest. They're warm to the touch.
They're speaking. They're sighing.
They're certainly alive. they have no
heartbeat.
So a population of humans w without uh
heartbeats. Um so the body has become
this contemporary uh chimera of of meat,
metal and code. Um, and what has to be
pointed out that what artists to do best
is to generate contestable futures.
Possibilities that can be performed,
interrogated, evaluated, possibly
appropriated, but most likely decided.
And we we should think in more
contingent and contestable futures. Um,
a future does not happen of necessity.
It happens because of contingency. A
future is not a future if it is not of
the unexpected.
Thank you.